- REPRESS
Republi of the Philippines fe ON
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES i peceiven
{Quezon City, Metro Manila fe EF EIVED, =
Tue, Agere
EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS e" >
First Regular Session or Ry
soe SF
House Bill No. 01
INTRODUCED BY REPRESENTATIVE ALAN PETER “COMPANERO” S, CAYETANO
anact
INSTITUTIONALIZING A NATIONAL VALLES, ETIQUETTE, AND MORAL UPRIGHTNESS
PROGRAM
EXPLANATORY NOTE

“The Flpino People, imploring the aid of Almighty God mandated through the Phiippine
Constanta he tate shal promote and protec the ysl, mora spiral itlectal and
soca wl being he youth and ls recognizes sole in maton buling It shall inaente nthe
Youth values of patriot and nationalism and encourage thelr involvement in pubic and eve
‘MatrsThe agpraon sto ul Jat and humane soley, an extabicha Government that shal
tbody our als and aspirations and promote the common god,

Flipinos are known tobe Godearing. loving and hospitable, faly-rentd, and resent
among athers.Acoringt Gallup Internation, the Plippines she 3 haplest County nthe
worl despite al te adveraes and challenges faced la recent years Test core vaues ety
Masa nation and as people night he changing mesa the eight of interne se where the
Yout Is exposed to all srt of Information and dsiformation, there i 8 presing eed to
Strengthen ourcommon core values and inate universally acceptable moral stands

Moreover, inthe advent of socal media and how it has evolved to be indispensable n our
dai ves es important that Eiqute and Moral Uprighines so troduced and taught oral
of to keep up with the moder era and aet according a cstomary st of behaviour

‘As the Philippine develops and economy grows, essential that we do nt forget who we
areasa people our divine purpose, ad dus tou nation

Invew ofthe foregoing approval ofthis bili earesty sought

ALAN 2 “COMPANERO" S. CAYETANO-
Representative
se pistrietof Tagg Pateros
1987 Philippine Constitution

Republic of the Philippines
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Quezon City, Metro Manila
EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS
First Regular Session
1
House Bill No.
INTRODUCED BY REPRESENTATIVE ALAN PETER “COMPANERO” S. CAYETANO
ANACT
INSTITUTIONALIZING A NATIONAL VALUES, ETIQUETTE, AND MORAL UPRIGHTNESS
PROGRAM
‘Beit enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives ofthe Philippines in Congress assembled:

SECTION 1. Title. This Act shall be known as the "National Values, Etiquette, and Moral
Uprightness Act”.

SECTION 2. Declaration of Policy. The Constitution states that imploring the aid of
Almighty God, in order to build a just and humane society, and establish a Government, it shall
‘embody our ideals and aspirations, promote the common good, conserve and develop our
patrimony, and secure to ourselves and our posterity, the blessings of independence and
‘democracy under the rule of law and a regime of truth, justice, freedom, love, equality and peace.

Moreover, itis the policy of the State to promote and protect the physical, moral, spiritual,
intellectual, and social well being ofthe youth and also recognizes its role in nation building. It shall
inculcate in the youth patriotism and nationalism, and encourage their involvement in public and
‘vie afar.

SECTION 3, Definition of Terms. For purposes ofthis Act, the following terms are defined:

(@) "National Values" ~ set of ideals and principles shared by the members ofthe community;

(b) “Etiquette” ~ customary code of behaviour to be observed ina society; and

(©) “Moral Uprightness" ~ conduct that conforms to an accepted standard of right and wrong,

SECTION 4. Establishment of the Commission on Filipino Values. The Secretary of the
Department of Education (DepEd) as Chairperson, the Commission on Higher Education (CHED), a
representative from both houses of Congress, together with representatives from major religious
{groups in the country shall conduct a nationwide consultation, and through consensus craft a
Program on National Values, Etiquette and Moral Uprightness.

‘The Commission shall draft a roadmap for the implementation ofthe Program, which shall be
submitted to the President for his approval. The Commission shall likewise implement the
approved Program.

‘The Commission shall continue to meet every three (3) years, or as the need arises, and shall
conduct an evaluation of the accomplishments and impact of this Act, as well as the performance,

for purposes of updating as needed.

SECTION 5. Institutionalizing of National Values, Etiquette, and Moral Uprightness in
Educational Institutions. To carry out the above-declared policy, teaching of the National program
‘on Values including but not limited to patriatism, national pride and identity, Etiquette, and Moral
Uprightness shall be institutionalized as part of the curriculum in all levels in Kindergarten,
Elementary, Secondary, Technical-Vocational, and College institutions in the country.

SECTION 6. Implementation in Workplaces. It is hereby mandated that al private entities,
‘through its Human Resources Department (HRD) or its equivalent, shall include modules of the
‘same subject in its employee orientation or training programs. Seminars may also be held in this
regard depending on what the respective HRD deems appropriate.

Government offices, Government. Owned and Controlled Corporations, national agencies, and
local government units, shal likewise observe the same practice across the board.

SECTION 7. Separability Clause. If any provision of this Act is declared unconstitutional
inoperative, the other provisions not so declared shall remain in force and effect.

SECTION 8. Repealing Clause. All laws, decrees, orders, rules and regulations or parts,
thereof inconsistent with the Act or the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto are
hereby repealed or amended accordingly

SECTION 9, Effectivity Clause. - This Act shal take effect fifteen (15) days after publication
in two (2) national newspapers of general circulation.

Approved,
