LAPP
Republic of the Philippines @ »
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 'S RECEIVED @\
Quezon City, Metro Manila e fl 2
me ]
a
EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS ‘a S
First Regular Session oy
mnoex SA
House Bit No, _°4
INTRODUCED BY REPRESENTATIVES ALAN PETER “COMPANERO” S. CAYETANO AND
PAOLO Z. DUTERTE
anacr
‘CREATING THE EMERGENCY RESPONSE DEPARTMENT (ERD), APPROPRIATING
FUNDS THEREFOR, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES
EXPLANATORY NOTE
“for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap.”
Galatians 6:7 (KIV)

Today is the best time to prepare our nation against calamities and disasters. Today
fs the best of times to plant the seeds of preparedness.

Disaster preparedness and mitigation find basis in ths biblical principle. The more
that we prepare, the more we are able to cope with disasters. The readiness and resilience
of our nation against disasters and calamities lie significantly in our own actions. In
general this concerns protecting the environment. In particular, this deals with enacting
proper regulation; ensuring preparations for disasters are in place, raising awareness on
disaster risk reduction, and conducting trainings towards disaster resilience.

In the 2012 World Risk Report, the Philippines ranked third out of 173 countries in
terms of disaster risk. Manila, the country’s capital has also been ranked by the Climate
Change Vulnerability Index (CCV1) as the most vulnerable of the world’s 20 “high growth
cities” to the effects of climate change. Further, according to Berlin-based environmental
organization Germanwatch, the Philippines ranked 2%! among countries most affected by
climate-related weather catastrophes in 2012. The Philippines eame in second only to Hai
in terms of "relative and absolute number of human victims, and relative and absolute
economic damage” caused by natural disasters.

In today’s world, disasters are a fact of life. Some emergencies may be totally
prevented, while others may not be averted. We may not be able to stop disasters,
however, we can empower ourselves with knowledge, _training/education,
equipment/tools,and the right infrastructure to cope with disasters, so many lives would
not be lost and there would be less devastation. A window of opportunity exists to sow

(2) Developing standard DRRM training modules and the conduct of
trainings, simulation exercises, and other capacity-building activities for
communities and specific groups, including, but not limited to, quick respond teams,
frontline government and private responders, and humanitarian aid workers;

(3) Establishment of a 24-hour National Operation Center consolidating all
relevant information on disaster prevention such as hazard maps, hospitals,
evacuation centers, NDRRMC offices, among others;

(4) Developing and monitoring the implementation of locality-based DRRM
contingency plans;

(6) Developing and implementing comprehensive, scenario-based national
and local preparedness policies, plans and systems, in primary coordination with
the local government unit/s concerned, in the wake of an imminent humanitarian
emergency and/or disaster. Such policies, plans, and systems include, but are not
limited to, preventive evacuation; the procurement of facilites, equipment, tools,
systems and other mechanisms to cope with the effects thereof; the deployment of
essential personne! and manpower in critical areas of concern; and the formulation
ofsuch other courses of action to avert the loss of lives, livelihood and or property;

(6) Strengthening the partnership and coordination between and among all
key players and stakeholders ina humanitarian emergency and/or disaster;

(7) Preparing the criteria and procedure for the enlistment of accredited
community disaster volunteers (ACDVs), and the drafting of a manual of operations
for ACDVs, in consultation with relevant stakeholders; and

(6) Such other functions relevant to its mandate of disaster preparedness.

(6) The Bureau of Humanitarian Emergency Relief Operations shall assist the
Secretary inthe formulation and implementation of policies, programs, and plans related to
disaster response, as defined in Section 2() of the Philippine Disaster Risk Reduction and
Management Act of 2010. In particular, it shall take the lead in the following activities, in
primary coordination with the local government unit/s concerned:

(1) Establishing and implementing a comprehensive, wel-coordinated,
effective and efficient Disaster Response Action Plan (DRAP) for every humanitarian
‘emergency or disaster, with the primary goal of preventing or deterring the loss of
lives, property and livelihood;

(2) Developing and implementing an integrated and coordinated system of
search, rescue and retrieval (SRR), and evacuations procedure;

(3) Establishing a mechanism to ensure the prompt and accurate assessment
of damage in disaster areas, including, but not limited to, the loss of lives, bodily
injuries, damages to infrastructure and public facilities, and the destruction of social,
economic, cultural, nd environmental assets;

(4) Establishing a mechanism to ensure the prompt and accurate assessment
of humanitarian needs in disaster areas, inluding, but not limited to, food, nutrition,
health, clothing, shelter, livelihoods, water, sanitation, hygiene, protection, and the
preservation of peace and order;

(6) Identifying standard-based relief shelters and sites for internally

displaced persons, as well as developing and implementing of a set of minimum

standards for such temporary shelters;

(6) Supplementing the efforts of the local government unit concerned in
providing basic social services, livelihood-oriented activities and psychosocial
interventions to the affected population, whether inside or outside temporary
shelters; and

(7) Such other functions relevant to its mandate of disaster response.

Im case there is total or considerable breakdown of authority resulting from the
humanitarian emergency or disaster, which requires response that goes beyond the
‘mandate or capacity of the local government unit/s concerned, the Bureau shall, with prior
authorization from the Department, directly formulate, implement, manage and coordinate
all disaster response activities. In such case, the Department shall be possessed with the
power to call upon other agencies and instrumentalities of government, and neighboring
Tocal government units, to augment, supplement and/or implement disaster response
efforts. Further, the authority of the Bureau shall be provided, described, and limited in the
authorization.

(@) The Bureau of Administration and Finance shall be composed of the Office of the
Legal Counsel and the Financial and Management Office. The Office of the Legal Counsel
shall be responsible for providing legal services and advice on all policies, programs, and
operational matters of the Department. It shall provide legal counseling services in cases
where the Department is a party and shall also handle administrative cases against any
personnel of the Department and submit recommendations pertaining thereto,

‘The Financial and Management Office, which shall consist of the Human Resources
Management Division, General Services Division, and the Finance Division, shall be
responsible for providing the Department with services relative to personnel information,
records, supplies, equipment, collection and disbursements, security, and custodial work. It
shall also be responsible for providing the Department with staff advice and assistance on
budgetary, financial, and management improvement matters.

Chapter It
ATTACHED AGENCIES AND COORDINATION WITH OTHER ENTITIES

SECTION 14, Relationship with Other Government Departments. - In the discharge of,
their respective responsibilities, the Department's bureaus shall coordinate with the
relevant Government departments, agencies, offices and instrumentalities, whose powers
and functions are relevant to the each bureau's respective focus area.

SECTION 15. Coordination with Other Entities. - The Secretary is hereby empowered to
‘constitute, call, convene, meet with, and/or deputize agencies of government, or an
aggrupation or cluster thereof, to assist, advise or otherwise coordinate with the Secretary.
‘The representatives from the civil society/non-governmental organizations and the private
sector may also be included, as necessary, as members of the coordination mechanism
called for by the Secretary.

SECTION 16. Attached Agencies. - The Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical and
Astronomical Services Administration (PAG-ASA) and the Philippine Institute of
Voleanology and Seismology (PHIVOLCS) are hereby placed under the supervision of the
Department; Provided, however, that they shall continue to perform their respective

functions as provided by law.
Chapter it
‘THE HUMANITARIAN EMERGENCY ASSISTANCE
AND DISASTER FUND, DONATIONS, AND ACCOUNTABILITY

SECTION 17. Humanitarian Emergency Assistance and Disaster Fund. ~ Atleast one
percent (1%) of the estimated revenue from regular sources of government, or Twenty
Five Billion Pesos (PhP 25,000,000,000.00), whichever is higher, shall be set aside as an
annual lump sum appropriation for unforeseen expenditures arising from the occurrence
of calamities: Provided, however, That such appropriation shall be used only in the area, or
a portion thereof, ofthe country declared as ina state of calamity.

‘The present National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Fund (NDRRMF)
and the Local Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Fund (LDRRMF) shall henceforth
be known as the Humanitarian Emergency Assistance and Disaster Fund (HEAD Fund) and
Local Humanitarian Emergency Assistance and Disaster Fund (Local HEAD Fund),
respectively,

‘The Department shall manage, mobilize, and with the approval of the President,
release resources for disaster risk reduction and management, including the funds herein
provided for. It shall also monitor and provide the necessary guidelines and procedures for
the release, utilization, accounting, and auditing of the Local HEAD Fund.

‘There shal also be created a regular fund for the personnel, resource requirements,

and other administrative costs related to the operations ofthe Department.
SECTION 18. Donations. - All monetary contributions, and donations in kind from local or
international sources, including, but not limited to, equipment, food, clothing, medicine,
and related supplies from international and local sources, shall be coordinated with the
Department. This central coordination mechanism would ensure that the same are
equitably and properly allocated and utilized actually, directly and solely/exclusively for
disaster risk reduction and management efforts.

‘The Department shall maintain and make publicly available a complete, accurate,

timely, and separate record of such donations, indicating the particular areas where such
were allocated, and the exact purposes for which the same were utilized.
SECTION 19. Accountability, Responsibility, Transparency, and Access to
Information. - The Department and all regional and local councils and offices under its
supervision or control, shall make available to the public for scrutiny, copying, and
reproduction, (I) any and all records of their financial transactions, including, but not
limited to, donations received, funds allocated, and amounts disbursed: (i) all information
pertaining to their official acts, transactions or decisions; and (ii) relevant research data
used as basis for policy development, regardless of the physical form or format in which
such record, information, or data is contained

The Department and the LGUs concerned shall also upload such records,
{information or data on their websites, which shall be regularly updated every fifteen (15)
days. In case of voluminous records, information or data, the Department and/or local
government units concerned may, in its/their discretion, upload only an executive
summary thereof, with a note outlining the procedure requirements to obtain full access to
the complete record, information, or data

‘The record, information, or data uploaded in the websites may be withdrawn after a
period of three (3) years from the time of uploading: Provided, That an abstract thereof
shall remain uploaded in the website, with an indication of the dates of posting and
withdrawal, and a note outlining the procedure/requirements to obtain full access to the
‘withdrawn record, information, or data.

Chapter IV
‘TRANSITORY PROVISIONS
SECTION 20. Abolition of the Office of Civil Defense; Transfer of Powers and
Functions. - The Office of Civil Defense is hereby abolished, and its powers and functions
are hereby transferred to the Department. The foregoing transfer of powers and functions
shall include all applicable funds and appropriations, records, equipment, property, and
personnel, as may be necessary.

‘The Department shall, by virtue of this Act, be subrogated to all the rights and
assume all the liabilities ofthe Office of Civil Defense, and all other agencies, or government
units whose functions and powers have been transferred to the Department, and all their
funds, records, property, assets, equipment, and such personnel as necessary, including
unexpended appropriations and/or allocations. All contracts and liabilities of the said
offices, agencies, and government units are hereby transferred to and assumed by the
Department and shall be acted upon in accordance with the Auditing Code and other
pertinent laws, rules, and regulations; Provided, That the officers and employees of said
offices, agencies, and government units shall continue in a holdover capacity until such
time as the new officers and employees of the Department shall have been duly appointed
pursuant to the provisions of this Act.

‘The same shall apply to agencies and government units which have not been
abolished, but whose functions have been transferred to the Department.

SECTION 21. Structure and Staffing Pattern. - The organizational framework and staffing
pattern of the Department shall be prescribed and approved by the Secretary within sixty
(60) days after the approval of this Act and the authorized positions created therein shall
be filled by regular appointments by the President or the Secretary as the case may be;
Provided, That, in the filling of positions created, preference shall be given to the personnel
of the Office of Civil Defense.

SECTION 22. Separation from Service. - Employees separated from the service as a result
of this reorganization shall, within six (6) months from their separation from the service,
receive the retirement benefits to which they may be entitled under existing laws, rules,
and regulations.

SECTION 23. Appropriations. - The amount needed for the initial implementation of this
act shall be taken from the current year’s appropriations of the National Disaster Risk
Reduction and Management Council, the Local Disaster Risk Reduction and Management
Councils, and the Office of Civil Defense. Thereafter, the amount needed for the operation
and maintenance of the Department and its Line Agencies shall be included in the annual
General Appropriations Act.

Chapter V
‘MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

SECTION 24. Visitorial Powers. - The Secretary of the Department and/or his/her
authorized representative shall have visitorial and examining authority over governmental
and non-governmental entities engaged in post-disaster relief in order to ensure that all
donations, financial or otherwise, coursed through them, are actually used for disaster risk
reduction and management efforts.

During such examination, the entity concerned shall produce all the reports,
records, books of accounts, and other papers that may be required.

‘The refusal by any such entity to allow an examination of its books of accounts and
pertinent records, or the concealment of any material information concerning its financial
status, shall constitute a legal ground for the cancellation of its registration, and the
revocation of all tax-exemption privileges and other benefits granted to it by law, in the
case of a non-governmental entity, or the institution of any proper legal action against the
erring official concerned, in case of a governmental entity.

SECTION 25. Stand-by Arrangements with the Private ‘Sector. At any time, the
Secretary of the Department shall have the power to negotiate, enter into, institutionalize,
and coordinate arrangements with any private person, natural or juridical, for the purpose
of ensuring the adequate, prompt, and ready availability of all goods and services,
necessary for disaster response, for as long as the emergency circumstances require, to be
deployed before, during, and after an emergency or disaster, subject to the payment of just
‘compensation in appropriate cases.

SECTION 26, Commandeering Private Property for Public Purpose. - The Secretary of
the Department shall have the power to commander any private property for. Urgent
public purpose, subject to payment of just compensation in appropriate cases, when there
is a clear and present danger that a disaster or humanitarian emergency would cause
imminent loss of lives and/or the massive destruction of property, and time is of the
essence, The commandeering powers shall last no longer than necessary or for as long as
the circumstances require.

The refusal by any such person or entity to be commandeered, shall constitute a

legal ground for the cancellation of its registration, if any, and the revocation of all tax-
exemption privileges and other benefits granted to it by law, in the case of a non-
‘governmental entity, or the institution of any proper legal action against the erring official
concerned, in case of a governmental entity. In addition, the official of the establishment,
situation, or functionality shall be subjected to a fine and/ or imprisonment as provided for
in Sec. 28 of this Act.
SECTION 27. Declaration of State of Calamity. - Whenever warranted by circumstances,
the Department shall recommend to the President of the Philippines the declaration of a
state of national calamity and the lifting thereof, It shall also have the power to, motu
proprio or upon the favorable recommendation of the LDRRMCs, declare a cluster of
barangays, municipalities, cities, provinces, and regions under a state of calamity, and the
lifting thereof, based on the criteria set by the Department. The President's declaration
shall entail access to international humanitarian assistance, as deemed necessary.

‘The declaration and lifting of the state of calamity shall be based on the results of
the damage assessment and needs analysis. The causes, effects and incidents of the
calamity and the need for the declaration shall be specified.

SECTION 28. Emergency and Contingency Powers. - Whenever it becomes necessary,
the Department Secretary, subject to the chain of command and with the consent of the
President, may call out the Armed Forces of the Philippines and/or the Philippine National
Police to prevent or suppress lawless violence, and to ensure the protection and
preservation of life and/or properties, inthe whole range of disaster risk reduction and
‘management.

In times of disasters, and whenever warranted by the circumstances, the
Department Secretary may call upon other instrumentalites or entities of the government
and nongovernment and civic organizations for assistance in terms of the use of their
facilities and resources for the protection and preservation of life and properties in the
whole range of disaster risk reduction and management. This authority includes the power
to call on the reserve force as defined in Republic Act No. 7077 to assist in relief and rescue
during disasters or calamities.

SECTION 29. Prohibited Acts. In addition tothe prohibited acts penalized under Section
20, in relation to Section 19, ofthe Philippine Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Act
of 2010:

(2) Any person, group or corporation who directly or indirectly requests or receives
‘any part of the funds devoted to disaster risk reduction and management, as well as,
monetary contributions and donations in kind, where such person, group or corporation
has no right to receive such proceeds from the fund, in whole or in part, monetary
contribution or donation, shall be guilty ofthe crime of corruption of calamity funds or
donations, and shall be prosecuted and upon conviction shall sufera fine of not less than
One Hundred Fifty Thousand Pesos (Php150,000.00) or any amount not to exceed One
Million Five Hundred Thousand Pesos (Php1,500,000.00), or imprisonment of not less than
twelve (12) years and one (1) day, nor more than twenty (20) years, or both, at the
discretion of the court, including perpetual disqualification from public office if the
offender isa public officer, and confiscation or forfeiture in favor of the government ofthe
objects and the nstrumentalities used in committing the herein prohibited act;

() Any person who, with intent to gain, but without violence against or intimidation
of persons nor force upon things, shall take personal property devoted to any disaster risk
reduction and management activity, without the consent of the Secretary, shall be guilty of
the crime of qualified theft, and shall be prosecuted and upon conviction sal be punished
by the penalties next higher by three degrees than those respectively specified in Article
309 of the Revised Penal Code;

(6 Any public oficer who, by reason of the duties of his office, is accountable for
calamity funds or property devoted to disaster risk reduction and management effort,
shall appropriate the same or shall take or misappropriate or shall consent, through
abandonment or negligence, shall permit any other person to take such public funds, or
property, wholly or partially, or shall otherwise be guilty of the misappropriation or
malversation of such funds or property, shall be punished by the penalties next higher by
three degrees than those respectively specified in Article 217 ofthe Revised Penal Code;

In all the above, ifthe offender is a corporation, partnership or association, or other
juridical entity, the penalty shall be imposed upon the officer or officers of the corporation,
partnership, association or entity responsible for the violation, without prejudice to the
Cancellation or revocation of these entities license or accreditation issued to them by any
licensing or accredited body of the government. If such offender isan alien, he or she shall
inaddition tothe penalties prescribed inthis Act, be deported without further proceedings
ater servic ofthe sentence.

‘The prosecution for the offenses shall be without prejudice to any liability for
violation of Republic Act No. 3185, as amended, otherwise known as the Revised Penal
Code, and other civil liabilities.

SECTION 30. Implementing Rules and Regulations.- The Department shall issue the
necessary rules and regulations for the effective implementation of this Act within ninety
(80) days after approval of this Act. The Secretary, in consultation with relevant
government agencies and other key stakeholders, shall take the lead in the preparation of
the implementing rules and regulations.

SECTION 31. Annual Report. - The Department shall submit to the Office of the President,
the Senate, and the House of Representatives, within the first quarter of the succeeding
‘year, an annual report relating to the progress of the implementation of all disaster risk
reduction and management efforts, and a detailed inventory of available personnel,
supplies and equipment. Such report shall be made available to the public for scrutiny,
copying, and reproduction, and shall also be uploaded in the Department's website.
SECTION 32,Congressional Oversight Committee,- There is hereby created a
Congressional Oversight Committee to monitor and oversce the implementation of the
provisions of this Act. The Committee shall be composed of six (6) members from the
Senate and six (6) members from the House of Representatives with the Chairpersons of
the Committees on National Defense and Security of both the Senate and the House of
Representatives as joint Chairpersons of this Committee. The five (5) other members from
‘each Chamber are to be designated by the Senate President and the Speaker ofthe House of
Representatives, respectively. The minority shall be entitled to pro rata representation but
shall have atleast two (2) representatives from each Chamber.

SECTION 33. Sunset Review.- Within five (5) years after the effectivity of this Act, or as
the need arises, the Congressional Oversight Committee shall conduct a systematic
‘evaluation of the accomplishments and impact of this Act, as well as the performance and
‘organizational structure of the Department, for purposes of determining remedial
legislation.

SECTION 34. Repealing Clause. - All references to the NDRMMC in existing laws,
including, but not limited to, the Philippine National Disaster Risk Reduction and
Management Act of 2010, shall be understood to refer to the Department created under
this Act.

All other laws, decrees, executive orders, proclamations, and other executive
{issuances which are inconsistent with or contrary to the provisions of this Act are hereby
amended or repealed accordingly.

SECTION 35. Separability Clause. - If any provision of this law is declared
unconstitutional, the remaining provisions thereof not affected thereby shall remain in full
force and effect

SECTION 36. Effectivity.- This Act shall take effec fiteen (15) days after its publication in
the Official Gazette or in two (2) national newspapers of general circulation,

Approved,

seeds of preparedness in order to reap resilience to disasters.

‘The Philippines is considered one of the nations "most at risk" of being struck by
disasters and recurring hazards, such as typhoons, floods, earthquakes, and landslides, due
to its geographical location. The country sits along the Pacific Ring of Fire, rendering it
susceptible to various natural catastrophes. The problem is compounded by gaps in the
implementation of laws and regulations. These include, but are not limited to, non-
compliance with laws such as the National Building Code and Fire Code of the Philippines,
the lack of evacuation procedures, the prevalence of illegal logging, the building of
structures on rivers and waterways which impede the flow of water, and the non-
segregation of garbage in violation of law.

According to the Asian Disaster Preparedness Center, there are different models on
disaster management. The traditional approach to disaster management has been to regard
itas a number of phased sequences of action or a continuum. This can be represented as a
‘cycle. However, more modern models view it as a continuous process, or a sequence of,
‘cause and effect, or a system of addressing the underlying causes of disasters towards safer
conditions. In many countries around the world, there are specialized agencies at the
department level which deal with disasters. There are a few which have a task force model
that the President/Prime Minister controls.

‘The present law on disasters, Republic Act No. 10121, otherwise known as the
“Philippine Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Act of 2010", revolutionized and
pioneered disaster risk reduction and management in the country. Signed into law on May
27, 2010, it ordained a National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council with
policy-making, coordination, integration, supervision, monitoring and evaluation functions.
When the Act was signed into law some three years ago, it was hailed as a landmark
legislation which adopts the pillars of disaster risk reduction and management in the
‘country. Today, the Act continues to be relevant in preventing/mitigating, preparing for,
‘and responding to disaster, yet recent experience shows as that our disaster risk reduction
management model needs to adapt to our culture and existing circumstances.

However, legislation should be created, or old legislation revisited, to promote
effectivity and efficiency, as well as accountability, responsibility, and transparency.
Differences between the national government and local governments as regards structures
should be reconciled, where appropriate, and areas for improvement addressed. For
Instance, in the present law, there must be a mechanism that responds to the eventuality of,
a total or considerable breakdown of authority resulting from a humanitarian emergency
or disaster. This requires response that goes beyond the mandate or capacity of the local
government unit concerned, Otherwise, there would be a paralysis in the disaster response
system and people affected by the disaster would not be able to receive critical life-saving
interventions and relief.

While we have very good people in the National Disaster Risk Reduction and
Management Council, itis high time that the government provides for a focused, single-
minded, specialized department to upgrade the government's capacity to respond to
disasters in an effective and speedy manner.

Philippine experience shows that there is a need to establish a clear chain of
command in times of major disasters, a focused and specialized single government agency
that functions not only after the occurrence of disasters, but works all-year-round to

ensure that effective mechanisms for disaster risk reduction are in place even before a
disaster occurs since the effects of climate change and the prevalence of disasters now
seem to constitute the “new normal’, Such specialized department shall bear laser-like
preciseness in focus, give primacy to pre-disaster resilience building, and prioritize life

preservation and basic subsistence needs in the communities affected by a disaster. The
dignity and value of the human life must be its guidepost and the deterrence of loss of lives
its ultimate mission. It shall prevent human misery because disasters often cause the loss of
life, human suffering, loss of income, and property loss and damage. Disasters also disrupt
the normal functioning of governments and communities, adversely affecting individuals
‘and families.

‘The Department must be simple in character, independent yet connected and
‘coordinated, empowered, capacitated, national in scope, and civilian in character in order
to carry out its mandate effectively. It must not be a mere coordinating body which
operates on an ad hoc basis. It has long been established that, under the principle of
administrative convenience, the efficiency of the delivery of frontline services is enhanced
through the creation ofa full pledged department, which is dedicated to an area of service
‘within its primary competence.

‘The proposed legislation establishes the ERD, which shall take over the policy-
‘making, coordination, integration, supervision, monitoring and evaluation functions of the
present ad hoc inter-agency council. The proposed department is equipped with bureaus
specifically tasked to deal with concerns related to the pillars of disaster risk reduction and
‘management, namely, disaster prevention and mitigation; disaster preparedness; and
humanitarian and disaster response. The functions of the bureaus are specified to ensure
performance of their critical mandates and roles before, during and after a humanitarian
emergency or disaster.

‘The Department is given supervisory functions over the Philippine Atmospheric,
Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration and the Philippine Institute of
Volcanology and Seismology to ensure that its goal of saving lives and property, during the
‘onslaught ofa disaster, is better fulfilled.

In order to ensure accountability and the responsible use of public funds, the
proposed legislation designates the Department as the manager of the Humanitarian
Emergency Assistance and Disaster (HEAD) Fund, and all donations, monetary or
otherwise, and establishes mechanisms of audit, reporting, and public information with
regard to the funds and donations received. Moreover, the legislation penalizes, in clear
‘and unequivocal terms, the corruption of funds and/or donations devoted to disaster risk
reduction and management efforts. The penalty for such corruption of funds and/or
donations is heavier than those penalties prescribed under the Philippine Disaster Risk
Reduction and Management Act of 2010, This would express a strong policy of the State
against corruption and Its intolerance of greed, during times of utmost need, in times of
disasters,

Furthermore, the Department Is given visitorial powers to ensure that funding and
donations to all entities are used actually, directly, and exclusively solely for disaster risk
reduction efforts. To further strengthen its mandate of ensuring the protection and
preservation of life and properties before, during and after the occurrence of disasters, the
Department is also equipped with emergency and contingency powers, such as
commandeering and calling out the Armed Forces of the Philippines and the Philippine
National Police in order to repress lawlessness and maintain peace and order in a disaster-
stricken area, The Department is also empowered to declare a state of calamity in a locality,
in consultation with the local government unit concerned, according to established
guidelines and protocols developed by the Department.

‘The ultimate goal of this proposed legislation is to uphold the value of human life
and the dignity of every person by efficiently and effectively addressing humanitarian
‘emergencies, including disasters, through the establishment of such specialized agency on

disaster risk reduction and management. The end in view consists of preventing or
deterring the loss of lives and the social, economic, cultural, and environmental assets of
the country, before, during and after a disaster or other humanitarian emergency. The
perspective of the legislation is “humanitarian” since it gives supreme value to human life.
In view of the foregoing, approval of this bill is most urgently and earnestly
recommended,
ALAN PETER “COMPANERO" S. CAYETANO PAOLO 4\9OTERTE
Representative Représkntative
1" District of Taguig-Pateros 1s District of Davao City

Republic of the Philippines
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Quezon City, Metro Manila
EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS
First Regular Session
04
House Bill No.
INTRODUCED BY REPRESENTATIVES ALAN PETER "COMAPANERO” S. CAYETANO,
‘AND PAOLO Z. DUTERTE
[AN ACT CREATING THE EMERGENCY RESPONSE DEPARTMENT (ERD),
APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines in Congress
assembled:
SECTION 1. Short Title. - This Act shall be known as the “Emergency Response Department
(ERD) Act of 2019",
SECTION 2. Declaration of Policy. - It is hereby declared the policy ofthe State:

(a) To uphold the sacredness of human life by efficiently and effectively addressing.
humanitarian emergencies, including calamities and disasters, through the establishment
of a focused, streamlined, independent, empowered, capacitated, full-time, specialized
agency on disaster risk reduction and management as well as emergency response , which
{s national in scope and civilian in character. The people are the most important assets of
the nation, and all disaster risk reduction and management efforts shall be responsive to
the humanitarian needs of the people, the dignity and value of the human person, and
respect for property;

(b) To promote a simplified, strategic, systematic, continuous, comprehensive,
inclusive, and integrated approach to disaster risk reduction and management, with the
tend in view of substantially reducing vulnerabilities and the risk of disasters and other
humanitarian emergencies, towards the preservation of life and property, thereby
ultimately preventing or deterring the loss of lives and the social, economic, cultural, and
‘environmental assets of the country;

(0) To establish a permanent, institutionalized, cohesive and comprehensive
framework for disaster preparedness, prevention and mitigation, and response, to be
implemented by a full-time and focused specialized agency with its own mandate, powers,
and funding, in coordination and with the participation of the Philippine government, other
foreign governments and financial institutions, international organizations, the private
sector, and civil society.

Im disaster risk reduction and management, disaster prevention and mitigation

shall, first of all aim the outright avoidance of the adverse impacts of hazards and related
disasters. However, with the knowledge and capacities to effectively anticipate, respond to,
and recover from, the impacts of likely, imminent or current hazard events or conditions,
preparedness action shall be carried out in the most effective and efficient manner. In a
disaster scenario, the response shall ensure the provision of emergency services and public
assistance, during or immediately after, a disaster;

(@) To create an integrated, systematic, comprehensive, and cohesive plan to
simplify, streamline, integrate, and coordinate the variousprograms, projects, and activities
of the Government and such other actors/stakeholders in disaster risk reduction and
‘management to ensure accountability, responsibility, and transparency, as well as to
achieve efficiency and effectiveness of in the performance oftheir functions.

SECTION 3. Definition of Terms. For purposes ofthis Act, the following shall refer to:

(@) Contingency Planning - a management process that analyzes specific potential
events or emerging situations that might threaten society or the environment and
establishes arrangements in advance to enable timely, effective and appropriate responses
to such events and situations;

(b) Disaster - a serious disruption of the functioning of a community or a society
involving widespread human, material, economic or environmental losses and impacts,
which exceeds the ability of the affected community or society to cope using its own
resources;

(©) Emergency - any occasion or instance for which, in the determination of the
President, national assistance is needed to supplement local government efforts and
capabilities to save lives and to protect property and public health and safety, or to lessen
or avert the threat of a catastrophe in any part of the country;

(4) Emergency Management - the organization and management of resources and.
responsibilities for addressing all aspects of emergencies, in particular preparedness,
response and initial recovery steps;

(€) Geographic information System - a database which contains, among others, geo-
hazard assessments, information on climate change, and climate risk reduction and
management;

(8 Government - includes the National Government, and any of its subdivisions,
‘agencies or instrumentalities, including government-owned and controlled corporations
‘and their subsidiaries, and Local Government Units;

(g) Hazard - a dangerous phenomenon, substance, human activity or condition that
may cause loss of life, injury or other health impacts, property damage, loss of livelihood
and services, social and economic disruption, or environmental damage;

(h) Humanitarian - one devoted to the promotion of human welfare and the
advancement of social reforms;

() Response - any and all projects, programs, plans, and activities pertaining to
action or inaction to prevent/mitigate, prepare for, and generally perform any and all
activities in relation to, disasters and other humanitarian emergencies. This includes, but is,
not limited to, the provision of emergency services and public assistance during or
immediately after a disaster. Disaster response that is predominantly focused on
immediate and short-term needs and is sometimes called "disaster relief"; and

) State of Calamity - a condition involving mass casualty and/or major damages to
property, disruption of means of livelihoods, roads and normal way of life of people in the
affected areas as a result of the occurrence of natural or human-induced hazard.

Chapter

‘THE DEPARTMENT PROPER

SECTION 4, Emergency Response Department. - To carry out the above-declared policy,
there is hereby created the Emergency Response Department, hereinafter referred to as
the Department, which shall prepare, integrate, coordinate, implement, supervise, control,
monitor, and evaluate all plans, programs, projects, and activities of the Government on
‘humanitarian emergency assistance and disaster risk reduction and management.
SECTION 5. Powers and Functions. - In addition to the powers and functions provided by
this Act, the Department shall also assume the policy-making, coordination, integration,
supervision, monitoring and evaluation functions currently lodged with the existing
National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council (NDRRMC), and shall take over
all of the latter's responsibilities enumerated in Section 6 of Republic Act No. 10121. It shall
also assume the powers and functions of the Office of the Civil Defense (OCD) as
‘enumerated in Section 9 of Republic Act No. 10121.

‘To this end, all references to the NDRMMC and the OCD in Republic Act No. 10121
shall be understood to refer to the Department created under this Act.

‘The Department shall also have administrative supervision and control over the
existing Regional Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Offices (RDRRMOs), and the
Local Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Offices (LDRRMOs), organized in all
provinces, cities/municipalities and barangays in the country, which are hereby thereafter
called Regional Emergency Response Offices (REROs) and Local Emergency Response
Offices (LEROs), respectively.

SECTION 6. Composition. - The Department Proper shall be composed of the Office of the
Secretary and the Offices of the Undersecretaries and Assistant Secretaries, and the
bureaus and services of the Department.

SECTION 7. Office of the Secretary. - The Office of the Secretary shall consist of the
Secretary and his/her immediate staff

SECTION 8. The Secretary. - The Secretary shall be appointed by the President, subject to
‘confirmation by the Commission on Appointments.

‘The Secretary shall have the following powers and functions:

(a) Advise the President in issuing executive orders, regulations, proclamations and
other issuances, the promulgation of which is expressly vested by law in the President
relative to matters under the jurisdiction of the Department;

(b) Establish the policies and standards for the effective, efficient, and economical
operation of the Department pursuant to a national disaster risk reduction and
‘management framework which shall provide for a comprehensive, all-hazards, multi-
sectoral, inter-agency and community-based approach to humanitarian emergency
assistance and disaster risk reduction and management, in line with Section 6(a) of the

Philippine Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Act of 2010;

(© Promulgate rules and regulations necessary to carry out department objectives,
policies, functions, plans, programs, and projects;

(a) Promulgate administrative issuances necessary for the efficient administration
‘of the offices under his/her jurisdiction and for the proper execution of the laws relative
thereto;

(©) Exercise direct supervision and control over all functions and activities of the
Department, as well asall ts officers and personnel;

(0 Create regional offices and such other service units and divisions, as may be
necessary; and

(8) Perform such other functions as may be necessary and/or proper to attain the

objectives ofthis Act.
SECTION 9. The Undersecretaries. - The Secretary shall be shall be assisted by four (4)
Undersecretaries in the performance of the Department's functions and duties related to
the pillars of disaster risk reduction and management, namely, (a) disaster preparedness,
(©) disaster response, and (c) disaster prevention and mitigation. Another undersecretary
shall be in charge of administrative and finance services.

The Undersecretaries shall be appointed by the President upon the
recommendation of the Secretary. They shall have the powers and functions, as provided
for in Section 10, Chapter 2, Book IV of the Administrative Code of 1987, relative to the
scope oftheir responsibilities as provided above.

‘The Office of the Undersecretaries shall consist of the Undersecretaries and their

respective immediate staff
SECTION 10. Assistant Secretaries. - The Secretary shall also be assisted by three (3)
Assistant Secretaries, one (1) for trainings; one (1) for operations; and one (1) for legal
affairs. The Assistant Secretaries shall be appointed by the President upon the
recommendation of the Secretary
SECTION 11. Qualifications. - No person shall be appointed Secretary, Undersecretary, or
Assistant Secretary of the Department, unless he/she is a citizen and resident of the
Philippines, of good moral character, and of proven experience or competence/expertse in
humanitarian relief assistance and disaster management over the course of his/her career.
‘The Secretary, Undersecretary, or Assistant Secretary shall not hold any other position,
public or private, during his/her tenure.
SECTION 12, Bureaus and Service. - Subject to the power of the Secretary, with the
approval of the President, to reorganize, restructure, and redefine the functions of the
bureaus and services for the effective discharge of the powers and functions of the
Department under this Act, the Department shall have the following bureaus and service:

(@) Bureau of Hazard Education and Risk Mitigation;

() Bureau of Disaster Preparedness

(6) Bureau of Humanitarian Emergency Relief Operations; and

(@) Bureau of Administration and Finance.

SECTION 13. Powers and Functions of the Bureaus and Service. - The bureaus and
service shall have the following powers and functions:

{@) The Bureau of Hazard Education and Risk Mitigation shall assist the Secretary in
the formulation of policies, programs, and plans related to disaster prevention and
mitigation, as defined in Sections 2(k) and 2(i), respectively, ofthe Philippine Disaster Risk
Reduction and Management Act of 2010. In particular, it shal take the lead in:

(2) Making an inventory and checklist of all personnel, equipment, and
supplies critical during disasters in all local government units, in accordance with
protocols and contingency plans, and endeavoring that the same be provided to the
local government unit within a period of twelve (12) months upon the passage into
law of this Act;

(2) Conducting a review of the National Bullding Code and Fire Code of the
Philippines, together with the relevant government department, and submitting the
results thereof to the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines, with a
vview of developing legislation, which seeks to strengthen infrastructure in line with
disaster prevention and mitigation;

(3) Developing, updating, and maintaining a national geographic information
system which shall be the basis of national, regional, and local disaster protocols,
and contingency plans, which shall be under the control and custody of the
Department. The same shall also be maintained at all local government units, as,
possible;

(4) Mainstreaming and integrating disaster risk reduction and management
(DRRM) and climate change adaptation (CCA) in all national, sectoral, regional and,
Tocal development policies, plans and budgets, relating to environmental protection,
{ineluding, but not limited to, those for land use and natural resource management,
enforcement and updating of all national legislation relating to modification of
infrastructure towards resiliency;

(5) Developing and implementing community-based and scientific DRR-CCA
hazard assessment, mapping, analysis, and monitoring;

(6) Establishing disaster risk financing, insurance, and other risk transfer
mechanisms at the community level;

(7) Establishing, developing and improving the end-to-end monitoring and
forecasting of hazards, including early warning systems and practices;

(8) Such other functions relevant to its mandate of disaster prevention and
mitigation,

(b) The Bureau of Disaster Preparedness shall assist the Secretary in the
formulation of policies, programs, and plans related to disaster preparedness, as defined in
Section 2() of the Philippine Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Act of 2010. In
particular, it shall take the lead in:

(a) Developing DRRM and CCA information, education, communication and
advocacy plans;
