7 EX Cf REPRESEN
Key lip Ay
ee S RECEIVED “al

se PF ox 27 299)
House of Representatives: \e - J
con Ee, etc ana Se we
MoE SA
EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS
rat Regular Session
RESOLUTION OF BOTH HOUSES No.3 __
Introduced by Representative TEODORICO “NONONG" T HARESCO, JR
RESOLUTION OF BOTH HOUSES
PROPOSING AMENDMENTS TO CERTAIN ECONOMIC PROVISIONS
OF THE 1967 CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, the 1987 Philippine Consttion isthe fundamental aw of the land
Which defines, establishes, and confers powers to the State and provides for the
Corelatve obligations ofthe peopl to abide,

WHEREAS, the economic provisions of the Constitution need to have the
Alebilty to allow the Philipines fo properly adapt to the changing global economy
through appropriate economte laws and policies enacted by Congress,

WHEREAS, there are some restrictive and anticompetitive economic provisions
othe Constitution needing to be amendment or revision to allow fr more investments
inthecountry and better efficiency in the economy;

WHEREAS, iberlizing the economic provisions in the Constittin will hasten
economic development which i expected under the current administration:

WHEREAS, according to Article XVM, Section 1 (2) of the Constitution, any
amendment to, o revision ofthe Constitution may be proposed by Congress, spon &
vote of three-fourths of al its Members

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED BY THE SENATE AND THE HOUSE
OF REPRESENTATIVES, AS IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED, by a vote of thee fourths of
allits Members, ach chamber voting separately, to propose the following amendments
to the Constitution

1. Article Xil Section 2 of the 1987 Pilipine Constitution i hereby proposed to be
amended to read a follows
1

"Section 2 All lands of the public domain, waters, mineral, coal,
petroleum, and other mineral oils, all forces of potential energy,
fisheries, forests or timber, wildlife, flora and fauna, and other
natural resources are owned by the State. With the exception of
agricultural lands, all other natural resources shall not be alienated.
‘The exploration, development, and utilization of natural resources
shall be under the full control and supervision ofthe State. The State
‘may directly undertake such activities, or it may enter into co-
production, joint venture, or production-sharing agreements with
Filipino citizens, or corporations or associations at least sixty per
‘centum of whose capital is owned by such citizens, UNLESS
OTHERWISE SUBSEQUENTLY PROVIDED BY LAW. Such
‘agreements may be for a period not exceeding, twenty-five years,
renewable for not more than twenty-five years, and under such
terms and conditions as may be provided by law. In cases of water
rights for ivigation, water supply, fisheries, or industrial uses other
than the development of water power, beneficial use may be the
‘measure and limit ofthe grant.
‘The State shall protect the nation’s marine wealth in its archipelagic
waters, territorial sea, and exclusive economic zone, and reserve its
use and enjoyment exclusively to Filipino citizens, UNLESS
OTHERWISE SUBSEQUENTLY PROVIDED BY LAW.
‘The Congress may, by law, allow small-scale utilization of natural
resources by Filipino citizens, as well as cooperative fish farming,
with priority to subsistence fishermen and fishworkers in rivers,
lakes, bays, and lagoons.
‘The President may enter into agreements with foreign-owned
‘corporations involving either technical or financial assistance for
large-scale exploration, development, and utilization of minerals,
petroleum, and other mineral oils according tothe general terms and
‘conditions provided by law, based on real contributions to the
‘economic growth and general welfare of the country. In such
agreements the State shall promote the development and use of local
scientific and technical resources,
“The President shall notify the Congress of every contract entered into
Jn accordance with this provision, within thirty days from its
execution.”
2. Article XI Section 3 ofthe 1987 Philippine Constitution is hereby proposed to be
amended to read as follows:
“Section 3. Lands of the public domain are classified into
agricultural, forest or timber, mineral lands, and national parks.
‘Agricultural lands of the public domain may be further classified by
law according to the uses which they may be devoted. Alienable
lands of the public domain shall be limited to agricultural lands.
Private corporations or associations may not hold such alienable
lands of the public domain except by lease, for a period not
‘exceeding twenty-five years, renewable for not more than twenty-
2

five years, and not to exceed one thousand hectares in area, UNLESS,
(OTHERWISE SUBSEQUENTLY PROVIDED BY LAW. Citizens of
the Philippines may lease not more than five hundred hectares, o
acquire not more than twelve hectares thereof by purchase,
homestead, or grant, UNLESS OTHERWISE SUBSEQUENTLY
PROVIDED BY LAW.
TTaking into account the requirements of conservation, ecology, and
development, and subject tothe requirements of agrarian reform, the
Congress shall determine, by law, the size of lands of the public
domain which may be acquired, developed, held, or leased and the
conditions therefor.”
3. Article XI, Section 10 ofthe 1987 Philippine Constitution is hereby proposed to be
amended to read as follows:
“Section 10. The Congress shall, upon recommendation of the
economic and planning agency, when the national interest dictates,
reserve to citizens of the Philippines or to corporations or
associations at least sixty per centum of whose capital is owned by
such citizens, or suche higher percentage as Congress may prescribe,
certain areas of investments. The Congress shall enact measures that
will encourage the formation and operation of enterprises whose
capital is wholly owned by Filipinos
In the grant of rights, privileges, and concessions covering the
national economy and patrimony, the State shall give preference to
qualified Filipinos
‘The State shall regulate and exercise authority over foreign
investments within its national jurisdiction and in accordance with
its national goals and priorities.”
4. Article XII Section 1 ofthe 1987 Philippine Constitution is hereby propased to be
amended to read as follows:
“Section 11. No franchise, certificate, or any other form of
authorization for the operation of a public utility shall be-granted
‘organized-ander thelaws of the Philippines atleast sixty percent
‘certificate, oF authorization be exclusive in character or fora longer
period than fifty years. Neither shall any such franchise or right be
granted except under the condition that it shall be subject to
‘amendment alteration, or repeal by the Congress when the common
good so requires, The State shall encourage equity participation in
‘public utilities by the general publi, The-partiipation-of foreign
investors in the governing body-of any public uilty enterprise shall
bbe-imited_to-thelr proportionate share-in-it-capital-and-all-the
‘executive and- managing officers of such-corporation-or association
must bectizens-oF the Philippines.”
3

5, Article XIV, Section 4of the 1987 Philippine Constitution is hereby proposed to be
amended t6 read as follows:

“Section 4. (1) The State recognizes the complementary roles of
public and private institutions inthe educational system and shall
txercise reasonable supervision and regulation of all educational
Institutions
{@) Educational institutions, other than those established by religious
{groups and mission boards, shall be owned solely by citizens ofthe
Philippines or corporations or associations atleast sixty per centum
of the capital of which is owned by such citizens, UNLESS
(OTHERWISE SUBSEQUENTLY PROVIDED BY LAW. The Congress
‘may, however, require increased Filipino equity participation in all
educational institutions.
‘The control and administration of educational institutions shall be
vested. in citizens of the Philippines, UNLESS OTHERWISE
SUBSEQUENTLY PROVIDED BY LAW.
'No educational institution shall be established exclusively for aliens
and no group of aliens shall comprise more than one-third of the
enrollment in any school. The provisions of this subsection shall not
apply to schools established for foreign diplomatic personnel and
their dependents and, unless otherwise provided by law, for other
foreign temporary residents.
@) All revenues and assets of non-stock, non-profit educational
Institutions used actually, directly, and exclusively for educational
purposes shall be exempt from taxes and duties. Upon the
dissolution or cessation of the corporate existence of such
Institutions their assets shall be disposed of inthe manner provided
bylaw.
Proprietary educational institutions, including those cooperatively
‘owned, may likewise be entitled to such exemptions subject tothe
limitations provided by law including restrictions on dividends and
provisions for reinvestment.
(4) Subject to conditions prescribed by law, all grants, endowments,
donations, or contributions used actualy, ditectly, and exclusively
for educational purposes shall be exempt from tax”

6 Article XVI, Section 11 of the 1987 Philippine Constitution is hereby proposed to

bbe amended to read a follows:
“SECTION 11 (1) Fhe-ewnership-ond-menagementof massed
seaperatives oF associations, wholly-cowneat anal managed by such
tizens
‘

“The Congres shall regulate or prohibit monopolies in commercial
‘mass media when the public interest so requires. No combinations
{nestraint of trade or unfair competition therein shal be allowed.
(2) The advertising industry is impressed with public interest, and
shall be regulated by law forthe protection of consumers and the
promotion ofthe general wellare

aly Fiipinacitizonso corporations or associations at least seventy
percontimofthecapital of which isowned by sucheizensshal
Allowed ioongagein theadvertsing industry:
“The_pontiipation-of-foreign-investors-in-the-governing-body-of
cemtesin-stch industry shallbeHmited4o shee proportionate share
inthe capital thereof-andallhe executive and-manoging ofices of
such enitee must be citizens oF she Philippines.”

After approval of the above amendments by the Senate and the House of
Representatives in Joint Resolution, the same shall be submitted for ratification by a
majority ofthe votes cast in plebiscite not earlier than sixty (60) days nor later than
ninety 20) days after such approval

Adept,

‘TEODORICO “NONONG" T. HARESCO, JR.
5
